Good day, dear colleagues.
I am Oleg Yevgenievich Boksansky,
Professor of the Russian Academy of Economics of the Plekhanov family.
The topic of our meeting today is the analysis of perception and control of sensations.
A person lives in a sea of information all the time.
We constantly hear something, see something, pay attention to something,
highlight what interests us, formulate any aspects of this perception,
engage in interaction, communication with other people,
and receive feedback from this interaction.
Naturally, the questions of perception are very interesting,
and psychologists paid a lot of attention to them
in order to understand how the perception of information happens,
what contributes to the perception of information,
what prevents the perception of information.
We will divide the acquaintance with perception into two main parts.
First, we will talk a little about what perception as a psychological phenomenon is,
and then, during the main time of our interaction,
we will analyze what social perception is.
Because the perception of information and the perception of information from other people,
the perception of other people, the perception of interaction with other people
are two different disciplines that have their own laws,
have their own patterns.
They are closely interconnected, of course,
and we will look at this in more detail.
What are sensations?
Psychologists define sensations as a kind of initial processes
of perception of different objects of the surrounding world.
A person has several main sensory systems.
First of all, this is the visual system, that is, our vision.
Through the vision, we receive about 90% of all the information that surrounds us.
And the auditory system, or hearing.
As for hearing, this is also a very important system for a person.
And we receive about 8-9% of the information that comes to us from the surrounding world.
And the third system is the kinesthetic system.
This includes taste, smell, tactile sensations.
Usually, for a person, this system is less important than the visual and auditory system.
And traditionally, we receive useful information from it, not more than 1-2%.
It is worth paying attention to the fact that all these percentages are statistical values.
Naturally, if a person is blind,
then he receives more than 80% of information about the surrounding world through hearing.
The rest, 10-15%, are related to the kinesthetic system.
Depending on the conditions we find ourselves in,
depending on how our sensory organs function,
how well they work, depending on the needs that are presented to us,
we will include certain sensory systems.
The data I mentioned regarding the hearing and kinesthetic vision
are the averaged values that we usually use in our everyday life,
when interacting with other people,
when working, when analyzing, when searching, when considering certain problems.
But we must pay attention to the fact that
the sensations themselves are the simplest elements of obtaining information from the surrounding world.
If we look at the surrounding world, we see flowers,
cars, people, and those or that figures.
But we do not perceive them separately, we perceive them in the system.
Perceiving the elements individually is something that exists only in the laboratory environment,
in our everyday life.
We perceive the surrounding world as a holistic system.
That is why psychologists usually say that if the sensations are the initial, primitive process of analyzing information,
then the perception is already a kind of a combination of sensations
that are based on our previous experience
and give a person an idea of what he sees, what he interacts with,
and gives him a certain picture of reality in which he can orient himself.
Again, if we find ourselves on the street,
we perceive a huge number of elements,
but we only select those elements that are important to us now.
A traffic light, the presence of cars, the presence of a crossing,
that is, those elements that we need specifically for our actions, to cross the road.
This is how it happens all the time in our life.
Depending on the tasks that lie ahead of us,
we focus and direct our perception to those or other aspects
that suit us in terms of solving those tasks that lie ahead of us.
In other words, we can say that perception is a conscious process of analyzing information
that comes to us from the surrounding world,
and this very perception is a kind of organizing of the elementary sensations
that come to us from our senses.
Scientists analyzed the human ability to perceive from different points of view,
and several different theories were proposed
that would try to explain how our consciousness perceives those or other phenomena of the surrounding world.
Let's briefly discuss these approaches,
because they will come in handy later when we try to analyze and understand social perception.
The perception that we are talking about now is the most general approach.
The main topic that we will focus on in the future will be social perception, as we have already mentioned,
that is, the interaction of people with each other.
And here we will need the theories that we will mention now.
The first theory of perception was actually created by Wilhelm Wundt,
the founder of psychology at the end of the 19th century.
Wundt came to the conclusion that our perception is an analysis of elementary sensations.
We see different kinds of elements, we perceive them separately,
and then we try to bring these elements into some structure
in order to understand what kind of whole image is hidden behind them.
For example, when we look at a traffic light, we see three signals there,
red, yellow, green.
These signals are in certain devices,
and by perceiving all these signals, we gradually assess for ourselves that this is a traffic light.
That is, perception is a decomposition of elements.
This was the very first approach that was used for the analysis of perception.
This approach turned out to be very fruitful,
but, of course, the further and the more we analyzed and studied the problem of perception,
it became clear that it was not so simple from the point of view of the analysis of the work of our psyche
on the perception of different kinds of information.
The main question that remained unclear was how we can perceive the whole system,
how we can distinguish different elements from the same images.
Different people see the same objects,
but different people in the same objects pay attention to different elements.
How does this happen?
On what basis do we distinguish certain nuances of the image?
At the beginning of the 20th century,
an entire field of psychology, which was called Gestalt psychology,
began to respond to this question.
As for Gestalt psychology, it was engaged in the analysis of sensations and perceptions.
Gestaltists fundamentally disagreed with structuralists and said that
no matter how many elementary sensations we study,
we will never be able to make a holistic image out of these elementary sensations.
Our psyche does not work just like a camera that captures certain approaches,
certain images, certain pictures.
Our psyche is something more.
The Gestaltists' motto was that the whole is not the sum of its components.
That is, if we take an object and start to distinguish its color, shape, mass, size,
its location relative to other objects,
we still will not be able to determine what kind of object it is.
Psychology works a little more difficultly than structuralism.
Gestaltists proposed their own approach to perception.
The term Gestalt is a translation of the German term.
It is something holistic, something fundamental, something indisputable.
Gestaltists came to the conclusion that when we perceive any object or phenomenon,
we distinguish the basic elements of the Gestalt,
which are perceived and assessed by our nervous system,
and it is these elements that are recognized.
A little later, when we talk about specific Gestalt approaches,
we will focus on the factors that the Gestaltists distinguished.
But despite all the successes that Gestalt psychology has achieved,
it has achieved great success because all the laws of perception and sensations
that were discovered by Gestalt psychologists have found their confirmation,
and today they are included in the Golden Fund of Psychological Knowledge without raising any questions.
Nevertheless, the Gestalt approach was still unable to analyze and assess all the nuances of perception.
Of course, new theoretical ideas were proposed,
which tried to explain the problem of perception sensations
with a wider spectrum than both structuralists and Gestaltists.
The next approach is the one that was named constructivism.
As for constructivism, it is again the 1920s and 1930s,
and the constructivists came to the conclusion that the main thing we need to start from is experience.
Our nervous system, our psyche, works with empirical data.
Therefore, perception is not just an analysis of the irritant that affects our retina,
our ears, or our kinesthetic organs.
Perception is a kind of interpretation of these processes,
and the signals of the outside world affect our vision, hearing, and kinesthetics.
Then the brain interprets the result of this effect
and tries to construct what we saw based on the irritant analysis.
What colors were there, what shape was there, what background objects were there.
It tries to construct the picture that affected our senses.
For some people, this reconstruction is successful, for others it is less successful.
But again, depending on our interpretations,
we are more or less successful in terms of analyzing the objects that affect us.
We can say that the constructivist approach was very popular in the second half of the 20th century.
It was able to answer many questions that were not solved by structuralists or representatives of Gestalt psychology.
Nevertheless, this approach found its critics and opponents
who believed that perception and sensations should not be considered as complex cognitive processes.
Thinking is a complex cognitive process, and intellect is an even more complex process.
As for perception, it is the most basic stage of the work of our psyche, and it should not be deliberately complicated.
The main proponent of this idea, including the researcher who did a lot to justify this point of view, was James Gibson.
In the middle of the last century, he was the founder of the ecological approach to perception.
As for Gibson's ecological approach to perception, he understood the word ecology in a somewhat different sense than we understand ecology today.
Gibson came to the conclusion that when we look at the world around us,
there is enough information in this world for us to be able to perceive what we see.
We assess the location of objects relative to each other.
We assess the texture of the surface.
It is rough, flexible, smooth.
We assess colors, shapes, and figures.
And this is enough for us to get complete information about what surrounds us without any cognitive interpretation processes, as the constructivists said.
At the same time, Gibson concluded that if we take the same vision,
and as for the vision, all his research was mainly devoted to the visual system,
then the vision is present in different representatives of the animal world,
which we cannot see due to the large and advanced consciousness.
And yet, they are well-oriented in this world.
Ants, bees, that is, the simplest living organisms that do not have a developed brain,
but yet vision plays a big role in their lives.
If we follow the point of view of the constructivists,
then we will not be able to understand how they can so successfully orient themselves with the help of the vision of the simplest representatives of the animal world.
After all, if we go from the point of view of the constructivists,
then the constructivists necessarily assume the presence of a fairly developed psyche.
And Gibson emphasized that since these simplest living organisms are able to perceive all the objects that are important to them,
and are able to survive,
then this is evidence that the whole world carries enough information for this information to be perceived and assessed.
And here neither experience nor any buildings are needed.
If there are external stimuli that act on the retina, the eye, receptors, perception,
then this is more than enough to perceive these phenomena.
Gibson's ecological approach was very fruitful from the point of view that when they began to try to model human perception,
then quite large successes were achieved with the help of this approach from the point of view of analysis and perception of the surrounding world.
But, of course, not all researchers agreed with this ecological approach.
And, accordingly, they continued to look for new ideas from the point of view of perception analysis.
The next approach that was developed was developed by David Marr and was called the information approach.
David Marr tried to return to the ideas of structuralism and combine them with the approach of Gibson.
Marr was based on the fact that all the external stimuli that exist in the surrounding world,
they really contain enough information for us to interpret them, to make them meaningful.
But, as for Marr, he thought about what are the elementary elements.
He wanted to highlight those elementary elements of objects, those elementary elements of structures that exist in this world.
And his success was that he managed to highlight the elements of texture that exist in this world
and that are able to be reflected in our psyche.
Lines, segments, angles, all kinds of contours, movements, other signs.
David Marr's approach was very successful, again, due to the fact that Marr was engaged in computer science.
His task was to model the perception of those or other external objects using electronic computing.
In this case, it was about the recognition of the same text.
And the successes that we all face, for example, FineReader and other programs,
are largely attributed to David Marr.
It is not mentioned very often, but in fact, it was Marr who was the founder
who laid the foundations for all modern text recognition.
Marr's approach was a really informational approach and a technical approach,
because it allowed to identify those elements of external structures
that are necessary and sufficient to be perceived and recognized by our psyche.
As the success of human brain recognition increased,
researchers began to develop a new approach, which was called neurophysiological.
As for Marr, he was engaged in perception regardless of the senses, regardless of the functioning of the brain.
But as for the researchers of the end of the 20th century,
they already came from the fact that it was necessary to find a connection between those or other parts of the brain
and their perception of various objects.
On the one hand, it was another return to structuralism,
but only at a more advanced level,
connected with great successes achieved from the point of view of psychology and neuropsychology.
Brain areas were identified that were responsible for the perception of various objects,
that were responsible for the perception of movement, tilt, those or other angles, those or other forms.
And, accordingly, they tried to create a definite correspondence.
What cells are activated from the point of view of external stimuli?
Again, as for this approach, it has already begun to develop in close connection with the creation of the theory of artificial intelligence,
because the perception of information is the first initial stage from which information begins to work.
And after perceiving this information, we can focus on it,
we can turn to memory and compare it.
We see a new object, or this object is similar to something.
We can build different kinds of mental images, and then build logical figures, and so on, based on the perceived material.
The modern state of this approach is, in fact, the creation of cognitive neurology.
As for cognitive neurology, it tries to explain the physiological foundations of the theory of perception.
Cognitive neurology consists of the fact that the perception of information is the very first initial stage of working with it.
Then, after the perception of this information, the recognition of the perceived occurs.
Here we already see a close intersection with constructivism.
We have perceived this or that information, and now we begin to recognize it.
What did we perceive? How useful is this information for us?
How new and old is this information for us?
After this recognition of information, we focus our attention on everything that we have perceived.
From all perceived objects, all figures, sounds, elements, our sensations, we perceive what we are really interested in.
For example, a phone call, if we are waiting for it.
For example, a time signal, if we are waiting for lunch.
We focus our attention on those elements, those components, those circumstances that we need, depending on our needs and capabilities.
After we have focused our attention on something, we turn to our memory.
How much do we perceive the objects, events, facts, new and old, what do they mean, what should we be ready for, what should we expect?
After we have turned to our memory, we can already build different kinds of mental images.
We are able to represent information.
Everyone does it in their own way.
Someone represents information in a more visual way.
It is those or other pictures, those or other colors, shapes.
Someone perceives information more often by hearing.
He perceives where and when he heard it.
Where and with what sensations, from the point of view of hearing perception, it is connected.
There are people who prefer to recall those or other sensations that are connected to them, depending on this information.
Tactile sensations.
Are they painful, pleasant, tense?
As for our perception, about 60-70% of people think visually.
Again, these are statistical data.
But it is necessary to keep them in mind, because depending on how a person prefers to represent information, we will have to build our interaction with this person.
About 20-25% of people prefer to represent information in a hearing form.
About 10-15% of people think visually.
If we want to communicate with different people and we want them to understand us, we must consider a typical way of presenting information.
We will talk about this in more detail later.
What conclusion can be drawn from this set of different approaches to perception?
Each of the concepts considered is somehow successful, in some ways it is less successful.
And most likely, if we really want to understand how the perception process is implemented, we should take into account the approaches of these different theories.
At the same time, it is very often useful to consider the patterns of perception that were identified by the Gestalt psychology.
When we talk about social perception, it is necessary to keep in mind that we never perceive a person just like that.
We perceive a person based on the background of other people, we perceive a person based on his activities, we perceive a person based on the feedback that we have about this person.
And in fact, our opinion about a person, our attitude to him is formed on the basis of many factors that need to be taken into account.
From the point of view of perception, these factors were analyzed and considered by the Gestalt psychologist.
Let's stop at these factors now, and then, when we move on to social perception, we will take them into account.
Basically, these factors are presented on the slide.
As we have already said, and I will often emphasize this, because this is really a basic idea of perception, we do not perceive factors separately.
We perceive factors as a whole picture, in their interrelationship with each other.
Therefore, the first factor of perception is the factor of proximity.
It indicates that objects located close to each other tend to be perceived as part of something as a whole.
And, accordingly, this is necessary to keep in mind when we create a certain perception.
When we see a person for the first time, we see how he is dressed, we see how he behaves, we see how he walks.
And on the basis of all these factors directly related to the object we are interested in, we form our initial idea.
The next factor is the factor of similarity.
It is that we strive to group elements according to some general groups.
In this regard, if we perceive many objects, then the fact of being perceived has, first of all, objects that we are already familiar with.
New objects are, accordingly, unexpected for us.
We do not know how to compare them, and therefore we kind of postpone their perception a little later.
But we perceive those objects, those elements that we are already familiar with and that we know how to relate to.
The next factor is the so-called factor of good continuation.
We always try to perceive objects located on one line or forming a particular figure.
A triangle, a square, a rectangle.
Because what concerns the images that arise in our psyche, they strive to be economic.
And, accordingly, instead of taking many different objects located in different elements, it is easier to create a certain single image.
On the basis of which we can already draw conclusions about what we have perceived.
By the way, this factor of good continuation finds its implementation in the so-called mnemonic rules, that is, the rules for memory.
We remember objects, trying to bind them to well-known other objects.
Many elements of the analysis of our cognitive system, our memory, come from this factor.
The next factor is the so-called factor of common fate.
Please note that in this case such common names are used.
And this is not surprising, because what concerns the Gestalt psychologists, they, in turn, came from the fact that we do not need to use all kinds of big scientific terms.
If we are talking about the simplest objects, about the perception, the Gestalt psychologists considered one of the simplest functions of our psyche, then we must speak in simple words.
We must use metaphors, we must use analogies.
And as for the factor of common fate, in this case, it means that the idea that, if, for example, we have a number of moving objects,
and we see some other objects, first of all, we will perceive those objects that move in the same direction as others.
We will not pay attention, initially, to those elements, those details that stand out.
We first try to organize, systematize, generalize the whole set of perceived objects.
Our psyche is so arranged that we try to find some standards everywhere, to find some common approaches everywhere.
Because there are a lot of objects for perception.
And we cannot perceive all these objects.
As psychologists proved, a person can work with a family of plus or minus two objects at the same time.
That is, we can work at the same time with five to nine objects.
This is called the Miller number, because it was Miller who justified this number experimentally.
And, accordingly, the idea is that a person at the same time cannot consciously grasp more than nine elements.
Again, this is a statistical idea.
Someone can grasp eight, someone eleven, someone twelve.
But the statistics are that at the same time, consciousness can focus not more than on nine objects, from five to nine.
Of course, you can do special exercises and develop this volume of perception.
But physiologically, we have five or nine objects with whom we can work at the same time.
The next fact that was highlighted by the psychologists in terms of perception is the factor of symmetry.
Again, I think that here we will all agree that it is easier for us to perceive symmetrical objects.
We just need less information in order to perceive those elements that have a certain general structure.
If there is symmetry, then, accordingly, you can highlight a certain general element, which is then focused in different directions.
Again, in this regard, we can talk about the next factor closely related to the first one.
This is the closedness factor.
The fact is that if we have many objects for perception, then we try to group them
and perceive those elements that are closest to each other.
That is, we form a closed figure.
Just because a closed figure is a kind of border that is placed on objects and makes it possible to perceive them as a whole group.
The next element, the next factor of gestalt perception, is the so-called factor of one-type connection.
This is the fact that if we highlight a certain pattern, a certain connection, the simplest one,
for example, all objects of the same dark color, all objects of the same oval shape, all objects of the same complex shape,
then, having highlighted this common connection, we begin to perceive those objects that this connection is suitable for.
In fact, having highlighted a certain element, we create a filter for ourselves.
And through this filter, the perception points, we look at those elements that satisfy this filter.
The next element, the factor of perception, characteristic of the human psychology, is the so-called law of pregnancy or the law of good shape.
If we see, for example, some kind of punctured figure, then we always perceive it as something holistic.
We will not say that this is a set of punctures, we will say that this is either a rectangle or a square.
And we can see examples of this on the slide.
These are the main factors of gestalt perception that were highlighted by gestalt psychologists.
These factors continue to open, modify, generalize.
But perhaps these are the original data that we will need later.
For now, this will be enough for us to understand the aspects of social perception that occur here.
So, we have considered the general approaches to perception, which try to describe the process of perception inherent in any person.
The main problem of perception
But perhaps the greatest interest for us now will be to present the problem of perception of people to each other.
We, a person, are constantly interacting with other people.
We are friends with someone, we work with someone, we relax with someone, we quarrel with someone, we get into a conflict with someone, we express our satisfaction or dissatisfaction with someone.
A person is a social being, always interacting with other people.
In this regard, the main quality inherent in a person is communication.
Communication with other people.
When we communicate, it starts with perception.
We must perceive the person we are communicating with.
And this perception, as you understand, is not a visual perception, to recognize a person.
This perception is connected and carries with it the whole loop that this person calls us.
What do we know about him?
What relations we had with him before?
What problems we had with him?
Can we rely on him?
Should we avoid communicating with him?
And so on.
When we talk about communication, three main elements are usually highlighted in communication.
First of all, it is communication.
That is, we directly exchange information.
Why do we interact with another person?
We interact with another person in order to learn something, to share something, to get some consultations, and so on.
This is the informational side of communication.
The other side of communication is interaction.
Already when we greet a person, when we greet him, we engage in interaction.
We see another person, we show those or that signs, another person reacts to us, we enter into some kind of contact, some kind of interaction.
We are constantly in contact with other people.
Whatever we do, whatever we do,
the very fact that another person enters our field of vision and we enter the field of vision of another person
is already a sign that the process of interaction has begun.
We smiled, we walked by, we pretended not to recognize each other.
We asked something.
This is the interaction that begins between us.
And the third side is perception.
We perceived a person.
We took those or other steps towards him, steps away from him.
We made our opinion, our idea about this person.
And, accordingly, we either want to continue interacting with this person,
or we will be sure that we can get the information we need from this person,
the information we need about the work, the information we need in our personal life, and so on.
Thus, before we start communicating, we must perceive another person and realize
how pleasant it will be for us to communicate with this person.
This is where the elements of perception arise, or what constructivism is talking about.
Very often we experience what is called an indomitable feeling of attraction to a person.
We cannot even explain to ourselves why it exists.
Nevertheless, this is a problem of perception.
We perceived this person.
He reminded us of someone.
Or he caused pleasant memories for us.
And we want to continue communicating with him.
On the other hand, we do not know the person yet, we imagined him,
and we already have negative impressions about him.
We cannot explain to ourselves why this is so.
We cannot understand what is happening, how it is happening.
We will not open up to others, and we will strive to turn away from communicating with this person.
How? Why does this happen?
After all, all these questions are very important, especially in business.
We go to negotiations.
We see the person we will negotiate with, depending on how we build our relationship with this person.
Depending on whether we like him, depending on what we know about him.
We already have certain expectations of whether the negotiations will be successful,
whether it is worth conducting them, whether we want to conduct them, how to conduct them.
Conduct them from the point of view of cooperation, from the point of view of competition.
Conduct them aggressively, conduct them constructively.
Accordingly, when we build social interaction, our task is to understand
how we can achieve the desired perception of us, the person we are negotiating with,
and accordingly, if we are conducting negotiations, how we can perceive a person without negativity,
without prejudice, in order to conduct a constructive agreement,
to separate objective circumstances from subjective preferences.
It is a very difficult task.
I have no doubt that each of you has encountered this many times in your activities.
We made mistakes, we made the right actions.
Can we clarify those elements of perception that are fair
and, on the contrary, avoid wrong ideas?
If we did not like a person, we did not work with him, we did not interact with him,
and he turned out to be a very good specialist, and our opinion was wrong,
we made wrong actions, which may later affect our actions as businessmen.
These are lost benefits, these are unfulfilled projects, these are wasted funds.
Scientists, of course, very often and a lot, analyze the problem of social perception,
that is, the perception of people by each other,
precisely because it is of such an important importance for our everyday activities.
Many different approaches, many different concepts were proposed,
which would try to explain the perception that is happening.
We will not dwell on them.
Today we will talk only about the causal theory of the Garland-Kelley attribution.
Just because this concept has received a very good experimental justification.
It is relatively simple and it is viable,
because the ideas, the aspects that are embedded in it, which are implemented in it,
are the aspects that we face in our constant communication.
The attribution is, in fact, the reason,
and the causal attribution literally means attributing reasons.
As for Garland-Kelley, he noticed that when people interact with each other,
even without sufficient reasons,
they already come to different conclusions about the actions of another person,
about why he does something, why he does something, what he wants to get in the end.
When we communicate, we always want to know the motives of the actions of another person.
And we are so arranged that, right or wrong,
based on reliable information, based on unreliable information,
we build for ourselves an idea of why a person behaves in one way or another.
We attribute the reasons for his behavior.
At the same time, of course, very often we cannot ask another person
whether we are explaining his behavior to ourselves correctly.
And all our subsequent interaction with him, subsequent communication,
subsequent communication, we build on the basis of these reasons.
If we attribute them correctly, our communication turns out to be successful,
or we are able to avoid negativity towards us from the side of this person.
But, unfortunately, often the situation arises
when we make mistakes in the reasons that we attribute.
And thus we behave completely inadequately,
because a person cannot understand where the aggression comes from.
After all, it seems that he has not taken any action,
it seems that he has not yet had time to say anything,
and we are already aggressive.
In fact, for some reason we think that this person is facing a Taliban threat.
And if the threat arises, we are naturally preparing to respond to it.
Gerald Kelly, of course, was not the first to study the theory of attribution of reasons,
but the results he received, the research he received, the school he created
had a very big impact on the entire social psychology.
This is one thing, but on the other hand,
Gerald Kelly was engaged in the advertising aspects.
And the results he received were very successful in business processes,
in negotiations, in interaction with clients, in the theory of sales.
Therefore, a large number of practical materials, practical trainings,
which are in demand, which are used in business, have been built on the theory of causal attribution.
What are the main ideas of Gerald Kelly?
The first type of attribution that Kelly highlights is personal attribution,
which is that a person commits an act,
we see what he does, and try to explain the reasons for this act.
For example, why does a person agree with everyone?
Why does a person constantly argue with the leadership?
Why does a person constantly strive to prove his importance?
We see his behavioral aspects and try to explain to ourselves,
it is very important, depending on the reason for the behavior of a person,
this includes what we expect from this person,
how we communicate with him, what impression he makes.
Personal attribution is the most common attribution.
If we see another person who does something,
the first thing that arises, we try to explain why he does it.
Is he competent? Is he not competent?
Does he really know something?
Either he is trying to attract our attention in some way,
or he is trying to portray himself as who he is not.
The second type of attribution that Kelly highlights is so-called object attribution.
The thing is that a person's actions are always associated with some objects of the outside world.
We are driving a car, we are speaking at some meeting,
we are sitting at some table,
and, accordingly, a person's behavior is always directed at something,
including when we are negotiating as an object,
the opposite side is acting, the side with which we are negotiating.
This is the object that our actions are directed to,
our manipulation, our influence, our interaction.
And, of course, we are interested in understanding
the possible causes of the action of the object of our interaction,
what to expect from it, and how to improve, correct, and optimize this interaction.
This is the object attribution when we try to understand
and assign the causes of the functioning of the object we interact with,
another person with whom we have this or that contact.
And, finally, the third type of attribution is the circumstantial attribution.
The thing is that we always interact with another person,
we always communicate, we always do something in certain conditions.
We are surrounded by some facts and circumstances,
a lack of time, a lack of information, envy, ambition, career aspirations.
Naturally, the interactions that occur do not occur in a vacuum,
as we have repeatedly said, they occur in the world,
they occur among other people, they occur in a certain surrounding reality.
And, accordingly, we strive to assign the meaning to these circumstances,
how much these circumstances interfere with or contribute to the achievement of certain actions,
certain conditions, certain efforts, how useful they will be in the implementation of our plans,
how much they will help me in the implementation of my aspirations,
and how much they will interfere with the implementation of certain tasks.
The distinction of the three types of attribution, personal, object and circumstantial,
is very important because it reflects three circumstances that always exist.
There is another person with whom I interact, there are circumstances of this interaction,
and there are reasons for this interaction,
which exist both on my side, on his side, and on the side of circumstances.
As for the theory of attribution, Keller considered a lot of examples, a lot of circumstances,
made a lot of summaries.
And, in particular, one very important summary that he made,
even got a special name, as the Fundamental Mistake of Attribution.
As for the Fundamental Mistake of Attribution, it got such a name for a reason,
because almost any of us makes this mistake.
As for this approach, Keller paid attention to one obvious fact.
I don't think that many of you will argue with me.
Let's assume that we evaluate the successes of another person.
It doesn't matter what kind of person he is, it doesn't matter what kind of relationship we have with him.
The majority of people who will evaluate, explain, attribute the reason for the success to another person,
will primarily look for the circumstances that helped the person achieve a certain result.
They won't look for the reasons that are typical of a person, his knowledge, his efforts, his efforts.
They will primarily pay attention to the circumstances that surrounded him.
And they will consider that this success is not due to the characteristics of a person,
no matter what kind of relationship we have with him,
but to the circumstances that helped him achieve a certain result.
He was in the right place at the right time.
He is not like that. He is lucky.
A completely different situation arises when we start to evaluate our failures, our failures.
If we are talking about our loved ones,
no matter how objective and experienced we are,
we believe that the reason for our failures is due to external circumstances.
We didn't bring the goods on time,
the boss didn't pay attention to me,
the phone didn't ring,
and, accordingly, the reasons for my failures are due to external circumstances.
If I consider my achievements,
the undisputed reason for my achievements is that I am so good.
I made an effort.
I put in the effort to achieve the result.
And no matter what circumstances prevented me,
despite them, thanks to my personality, qualities, willpower, I achieved the result.
This is a fundamental mistake of attribution.
And even knowing about it, people...
Today, a lot is written about causal attribution.
It is studied in many MBA courses,
it is studied in many trainings,
but still, in fact, it is really a distinctive feature of a person.
If I see the success of another person,
I attribute the success of another person to the circumstances that led to it.
If I see the failure of another person,
I say that no matter what circumstances led to it,
he would still have achieved nothing.
I attribute the personal reason for his failure.
When it is about me, I act in a completely different way.
My achievements are my personal qualities, I am so good,
and my failures are external circumstances.
This is a fundamental mistake of attribution.
It is a simple thing.
And, of course, Kelly was not the first person to pay attention to it.
This approach has been known for a long time,
we can read it in a huge number of books,
both in artistic literature and in historical literature.
But as for Kelly, he experimentally justified and proved it.
After Kelly, there was already such a large experimental base
that really recorded that a person in his social perception is so.
This is how a person's impression is formed.
All my successes are my achievements, all his successes are circumstances.
And vice versa, all my failures are circumstances,
all his successes are circumstances that he was lucky.
This mistake is manifested in business, in power, in politics.
It is made again and again.
They know it, but they still make it.
Perhaps this is the human weakness that we have.
But the fact is that when we interact,
when we form a social communication,
and try to analyze it,
try to analyze the causes of our achievements, our failures,
we need to keep in mind this approach of causal attribution,
because it often seems useful and interesting to us.
This is what concerns those ideas that can be highlighted in social perception
in terms of the formation of an impression.
But at the same time, we need to pay attention to one more fact.
When people interact, we often use verbal communication.
We talk about something, we discuss something.
We use speech, we use those or other sound forms of communication,
which exist.
However, in addition to verbal communication,
there are a huge number of non-verbal approaches,
non-verbal ways of conveying those or other sensations
that are analyzed, that are perceived by another person.
The mimics that are written on our faces are related to non-verbal communication.
What concerns this mimicry,
it can often coincide with what we say.
We smile because we are really glad that we met someone.
But it often turns out that the mimics go against our words.
We say that we are glad to see someone,
but we bend our lips, turn away, look away.
And at the same time, the person we interact with notices all this.
And he sees how our verbal phrases go against what we really experience and experience.
Moreover, if we control these things in terms of verbal phrases,
then our facial expressions, our emotional reactions are usually not controlled by a person.
Just because he doesn't pay attention to it.
In addition to facial expressions, we also have gestures, poses, movements.
In the end, as far as our speech is concerned,
we also have various intonations, various exclamations,
various whispers, various intermediates, various pronouns,
which, again, tell our real attitude towards a person,
our real attitude to the actions he takes,
our real attitude to what we say.
This is the situation when we talk one thing, think another, and strive to do the third.
As for non-verbal communication, this is a separate and very interesting topic.
Naturally, in order to master your non-verbal skills,
you need to at least study your usual ways of expression,
facial muscles, see yourself in the mirror, as it is called.
There are special non-verbal communication trainings,
but we will not talk about it in more detail today.
We will focus our attention on the ways of analyzing verbal information,
because verbal information, from the point of view of social interaction,
is the most significant and the most interesting.
When we talk about the impressions that people have during communication,
it is often based on the words that we say,
in the sense that we insert.
And, accordingly, we will focus our attention on the analysis of what verbal communication is,
and what verbal methods of controlling impressions are.
So, when people talk about something,
they use the usual communication methods in words.
Someone speaks quickly, someone speaks slowly,
someone speaks aggressively, someone strives to find a compromise in interaction.
As the research conducted by cognitive psychologists shows,
there are certain ways of verbal communication of people.
Thanks to the work of Bateson, Grinder, Diels,
the most significant elements that characterize our verbal communication methods were highlighted.
Now we will consider different approaches to verbal communication,
and at the same time we will analyze how these approaches can be useful
in the process of communication, in the process of interaction.
And in the situation when we need to form a certain impression about another person,
and when we need to control the impression,
so that we get the desired impression of another person.
As for the metaprograms,
metaprograms are a set of verbal tools
inherent to each person in terms of focusing attention on certain ways of expressing their thoughts.
Usually, we do not pay special attention to the formation of certain metaprograms.
They are formed depending on our upbringing,
they are formed depending on our education,
depending on the communication with those people who surround us, who teach us, who are significant to us.
We usually look at the person who has achieved the results that we also want to achieve
and try to model his behavior.
And in general, unconsciously, unconsciously,
we also model his behavior, his way of speaking, his way of presenting verbal information.
As for Grindr, Bates, and Nandil,
they conducted an analysis of the verbal communication of a huge number of people.
These are successful people, unsuccessful people, ordinary people, outstanding people.
And they were able to identify common approaches and common ways that they use
in order to form a certain impression
and achieve the impression that was formed by other people.
As for these elements,
they highlighted basically 7 elements.
Again, it should be said that, of course, after these works were published,
after other researchers did analysis, repetition, optimization of the same studies,
they proposed other elements of metaprograms,
other ways of focusing attention on one or another information,
on certain nuances, on ways of presenting and interpreting information.
But, in principle, I think these questions, these nuances are not so important to us.
Let's focus on the original schemes that were developed.
So, when we talk about metaprograms,
the first thing to pay attention to is the ways of classifying information about the world.
If a person says something, if a person interacts with someone,
has verbal contact, then he is engaged in transmitting information.
It can be completely different information that concerns different aspects of life,
different aspects of reality.
At the same time, people usually pay attention,
in their story they focus attention on quite specific approaches.
So, on what elements can this information be classified?
Well, there are people who prefer to pay attention to the staff first of all.
They don't say that something has been done, the results have been achieved.
They say specifically, this person did this, another person did that.
Each action they highlight, each event, each circumstance they talk about,
they always say who did it, who should be focused on,
who is the authority in a particular area.
This is the classification of the world by staff or people.
And, accordingly, if we interact with such people,
and we see that it is important for them to demonstrate the knowledge of those or other people
who dealt with these issues, then we should build our communication in the same way.
We should also show our attention to staff, to people,
if we want to get in touch and communicate with representatives of this type of metaprograms.
Other people pay more attention to the values.
Why do we do something?
Why do we go to work?
Why do we pay taxes?
Why do we study?
Why do we sign contracts?
Why do we make agreements?
For these people, it is not important who signs the contract,
who signs the contract, what it is about.
For these people, it is not important where it is done, when it is done.
For these people, the values are important.
The values, from the point of view of the answer to the question, why?
If I do something, then I must have a goal.
And all my actions must be aimed at the realization of this or that goal.
For these people, the values are important.
If we want to get in touch with such a person and get an understanding with him,
because the metaprogram is a way of understanding in our verbal interaction with another person,
if we understand the accents that he highlights,
and he focuses his attention on, then we can find mutual understanding with him.
If a person we are talking to is always thinking about values,
why am I doing certain actions,
and for us it is important who is doing these actions,
we will not get into mutual understanding.
This is what is called, he is talking about one thing, and I am talking about another.
I ask him about the goal of our meeting,
and he tells me that this person advised me to meet him.
We do not have mutual understanding.
We speak the same language, but in fact we speak different languages.
We focus our attention on different aspects.
And if we focus our attention on different aspects, then, accordingly,
we will no longer have mutual understanding.
We speak different languages.
Another category of people can attract attention
either through processes or procedures.
That is, in fact, a question of how we do something.
Again, for someone the process is important,
the procedure itself is important.
And he will list what needs to be done,
what dangers to avoid,
what results to achieve,
what to get, how to get,
how to do it.
These are the doers.
For these people the procedure itself is not important.
For these people the result is not important.
Here we are talking about what?
It is the process of doing.
Accordingly, when we interact with such a person,
we should not strive to pay attention to the final result that we want to get.
The execution of the plan, the achievement of such and such indicators.
These people need to be told about the process.
How will the logistics of the cargo be carried out?
How will its distribution be carried out?
Where will it be implemented?
What processes, what forms,
what are the possibilities, what are the dangers?
These are, in fact, the doers.
Here we are talking about the procedure.
We are the doers.
Naturally, if we are talking about mutual understanding,
we must understand the person's desire.
Because these are questions that are important to him.
And, accordingly, we must also go to this procedural level.
Naturally, this is the art of negotiations.
Of course, it is difficult for us to move away from our schemes.
But the difference between a good negotiator and an ordinary one
is that he can always adapt to the classification,
to the nuances that he has from the person he is communicating with.
Other people may pay attention not to the processes,
but to the actions, to the things.
What will be the result?
If the process of doing concerns the process-makers,
and the longer and better you will schedule this process,
the longer and better you will talk, the more calm it will be,
the more those who are focused on the actions and the things are interested in the result.
What exactly will I get as a result of this process?
And here, very often, there is a contradiction.
If there is a process-maker and a classifier in action,
they will not understand each other.
For a person will ask,
I am now signing a contract, I am paying this money,
then I transfer it, what and when I will get in the end,
and he will start to answer in the verbal order,
that we will deliver this, we will convert this, and so on.
People again speak different languages,
these are their languages, but they do not have an understanding between them.
Again, another way of classifying the world is by time.
There are people, and they are not so rare,
for whom the time aspects are important.
If we do something, how much time will it take us to do this operation?
What time should the contracts be signed?
When should the goods be delivered?
In fact, these are people who are focused on the time frame,
and for whom such a parameter as time is important.
These are people who value their time,
these are people who know how to work and know how to operate with time.
And if this person asks you questions
about the time of implementation of certain actions,
the time of implementation of certain processes,
then it makes no sense to speak to him in a procedural language.
He does not need to know what you will do,
he is interested in how long it will be done.
He does not care about the result,
what you do is very important,
he cares about the time when this result will be achieved.
Again, it does not matter whether it is about values or people who will do it.
Time. What?
We have signed a contract.
On the 23rd, all our agreements must be fulfilled.
How will it be done?
Who will do it?
Why will it be done?
These are the second, third, fourth, fifth questions.
I am interested in time.
If I want to make an adequate negotiation,
I must switch to this language.
The next element in the classification of the world is the place.
Where will everything be implemented?
Where will the products be delivered?
Where will the contract be signed?
Where will the deal be made?
Neither time nor values are important,
nor the process, nor the result, nor the procedure.
The place is important.
Again, I want to draw your attention to the fact that,
as usual, when we list the schemes,
it does not mean that all people are divided into six categories.
Of course, we are all normal people,
and we are all interested in all of these points.
But!
Of all these points,
we may be more or less interested in some of them.
It does not mean that there are people who only classify the world
by people, by values, by processes, by actions, by time, by place.
There are people who can classify time by processes
and the time of the implementation of the process.
There are people who can classify the world by people and the implementation of the process,
by values and the place of the implementation of the process.
When we interact with someone,
we need to listen to him carefully and understand these important elements for a person.
The scheme of the meaningful model that we are talking about now
essentially sets out the criteria
that we need to be able to pay attention to
and which will allow us to take one of the steps
to build mutual understanding.
If we are negotiating, we need to understand the other person.
If we want a person to have a certain impression,
then, accordingly, we will be interested in speaking to this person in the same language.
So, this is the first metaprogram
that was considered, that was built.
And you can judge that
what concerns this metaprogram,
again, there is nothing new in it.
These are all obvious things.
But, unfortunately, or fortunately,
all those successful elements that appear in different people,
they are that they are able to focus their attention
on what is important, on what is relevant for another person
and to meet him in interaction.
The next element of the metaprogram
is the style of information organization.
What is meant in this case?
The fact is that the first element of this style
is the size of the generalization that we do.
Different people are used to doing different kinds of generalization.
Someone likes to speak, someone has a fairly large generalization.
We have a large scale.
If we speak about the Motherland as a whole, about the planet as a whole,
about the Universe as a whole, about business as a whole,
we will not go into such details
that concern the city, the district, the person.
In this case, we are talking about a global approach.
Globalists are strategists.
Another style of information development is the small size.
I do not argue that patriotism is good.
I do not doubt that we should think about the Motherland.
But still, I am sorry, here is my company,
here is my money, here are my results.
And I am not interested in what will happen in our country.
I am interested in what my company,
specifically, in a week, specifically,
in Moscow will receive from our contract.
When two people meet with different information distribution,
very often they speak about their own,
but they do not understand each other.
They speak the same language, they speak about the same contract,
they speak about the same interaction.
But one person speaks about the prospects of the business as a whole,
and the other person speaks specifically about his own tasks and problems.
The fact is that, again, each of us is used to think in different categories.
This is a habit that has entered our blood.
This is what we do not realize.
And when we try to understand,
but we do not see this understanding,
we can again misjudge the impression that is created in us by another person.
Maybe he is mocking us,
maybe he manipulates us, maybe he wants to deceive us.
The problem is that we have different ways of communication,
which exist when we give the same information,
which is equally interesting to both of us.
But, in addition to the size of communication,
there are also different ways of thinking.
It has long been a common phrase that all people are different,
that everyone has different intellectual approaches,
different ways of thinking.
But as for cognitive science,
it has managed to highlight three ways of thinking
that can be used to develop people.
Again, these methods have long been known in logic,
but no one has tried to apply these ways of thinking to practice,
to our specific business contacts, business analysis, business interaction.
As for these ways of thinking,
the first way of thinking is deduction,
deductive way of thinking.
In this case, we go from general to private.
First, we analyze common ideas, common concepts,
and then from these common ideas,
depending on what tasks arise in front of us,
we are already trying to draw private conclusions.
This deductive way of thinking is very widespread and is used in mathematics.
Another way of thinking is induction.
This is a way of thinking when we go from private to general.
Despite the fact that Sherlock Holmes called his way of thinking deductive,
in fact, it was induction from a logical point of view.
He selected details, he selected elementary approaches,
and then, based on these small facts,
he drew a general conclusion about the motive of a crime, about the place of a crime.
From a logical point of view, this is an inductive approach.
Again, many of you may remember those people
who can be stopped by every little thing,
who are very modest, who are very pedantic.
And if you want to get an understanding with them,
you must be ready that every detail
will be considered from different points of view,
that it will be broken, that it will be messed up.
And this is simply because a person is so used to thinking,
that a person is so used to approaching these issues.
This is his way of analyzing information, this is his way of thinking.
It makes no sense to say whether he is bad or good.
You can think deductively, you can think inductively,
and get equally good results.
To someone, as usual, to someone, as good.
And the third way of thinking that stands out
is the so-called analogy thinking, or the translation, as it is called in logic.
Such a person does not need to draw conclusions from the general to the private,
from the private to the general.
Such a person needs to draw some kind of analogy,
that if we conclude this contract,
we will get a situation similar to the one that happened at Ford factories in the 1930s
and contributed to the formation of the middle class in America.
You drew an analogy.
And this is understandable for a person.
This is a person who thinks metaphorically,
who thinks using analog schemes,
who wants to either imagine something,
either to hear something,
or, in the end, to feel something.
Here, generalization or reasoning are not important.
The analogy is important.
A person does not understand something.
And we must make up a metaphor,
make up any analogy that will help him understand the process.
If we get into this analogy that a person has made,
we conclude the contract, we have a successful negotiation.
If we cannot deny it, then we say everything is absolutely correct.
We do not make mistakes.
But a person does not understand us.
He does not understand the wise words that are spoken here.
And it is not clear why he needs it.
He needs examples.
There are a lot of people who need to be given a good example from his life,
from the life of people important to him,
from the life of those he is guided by,
in order to convince him that the impression that we are trying to achieve,
the idea that we are trying to achieve,
is really interesting to him.
In addition to the way of thinking,
when we talk about the style of organization of information,
the representative system that is important to a person is also very important.
This is what we talked a lot about at the very beginning of our meeting today.
A person either sees something,
and this is a visual system for him,
a person either hears something,
and this is an audio system for him,
or a person tries to do something with his own hands, to feel.
This is a kinesthetic system.
This is very important to know when we make representations.
We have already talked about the visuals,
which is about 60% of people,
and the ideal is 20-20% of people,
and the kinesthetic is 10-15%, but this is a statistic.
If you come with a wonderful presentation
to the owner of the company with whom you want to conclude a business contract,
and you start showing it,
and the presentation is very good,
you really put a lot of effort into it,
it reflects all aspects of your contract,
the person doesn't understand.
And he doesn't understand because he doesn't need to see what you show him on the slides,
but to hear what you say.
To tell the same thing,
instead of saying, look at the slide,
read it to this person,
talk to him,
no matter how strange it seems to you.
It seems like, why would I read it, he doesn't know how to read himself.
He knows how to read, but he is used to listening to information.
And when you say, here is a chart,
he looks at it, he sees it,
but this is not a significant way of presenting information to him.
And if you say the same thing in words,
then he will hear and understand what you want to say to him with this chart.
If you come and make a wonderful speech presentation,
where you show some kind of feedback
about your company,
about your problems,
about your approaches,
and the person is visual,
you can speak brilliantly for 2-3 hours,
with good diction,
with good intonation,
he will hear everything, he will understand everything,
but this is not him.
He is sorry for those 3 hours he spent on you.
Give him a chart,
where you drew a chart,
where you showed the growth of the indicators he will achieve.
This will be enough for him,
and it didn't take 2-3 hours.
Yes, of course.
When you come to assist in negotiations,
you may not know the partner you are working with,
but here you need to know how to orient yourself.
This is what this program is for,
this is what the cognitive approach is for,
in order not to give these recipes once and for all,
but to make you, when you communicate with a person,
look at his reaction and see if he hears you,
sees you, feels you,
and gets the results he needs.
If you see that your drawings don't reach the person,
voice them,
and you will see for yourself
how much the perception of everything you say has changed.
All these elements in the style of the organization of information
must be constantly taken into account,
because brilliant presentations,
brilliant efforts of the whole departments
collapse for one simple reason.
You made a beautiful drawing,
a three-dimensional graphic,
but you didn't make the necessary audio accompaniment,
and the person didn't hear what you wanted to show him.
As for the visuals,
they very often use the words
I see, I understand,
and, accordingly, I am clear.
And the audio speakers say,
I hear,
I listen,
I am deaf.
So, those particular phrases
characterize the representative system that works.
The most difficult thing is with the visual aesthetics,
because these are people who feel,
who can speak about a rough thought,
who can speak about a flat idea,
and this is not a judgmental judgment.
They translate their kinesthetic sensations,
the sensation of hands,
the sensation of taste,
the smell that is familiar to them.
And since the kinesthetic sensations of a person...
We use the description of these sensations first.
As for our psyche,
it works visually and audibly,
so it is the most difficult to work with the kinesthetic.
But it is also interesting,
because if you can communicate with him
in the language of his representative system,
in the language of his perception organs,
and he naturally understands perfectly
that as few people can do it,
you immediately arrange a conversation.
And it doesn't matter what you came with.
It is important that you give him pleasure
to talk to him in the rare kinesthetic language.
And this is worth it.
So, this is what concerns the style of information organization.
The next element of the metaprogram
that is worth talking about
is the focus of comparison.
We provide information,
and when we provide information,
we always try to make different kinds of comparisons.
How does our proposal differ from the proposal of a competitor?
How is our proposal better than the proposal
that another company makes?
As for the focus of comparison,
there can be two things.
Either we focus on similarity,
that is, we try to find common elements that exist,
or we focus on differences.
What is the difference of our proposal?
This is a very important element,
because if you come to him with your business portfolio,
with a very interesting proposal,
and it is important for a person to find out
what he or she thinks about it,
then you come to him with different proposals.
But if this person likes to distinguish
what your proposal is different from what he or she has already heard,
and you, on the contrary, think that it is better to talk about similarity,
that my proposal is slightly different from what you have in your company,
you immediately talk to him in different languages.
He needs a difference.
He knows himself what is happening in his company,
how it is happening.
But what is the difference between what you propose
and what he or she owns now?
If you catch this focus of comparison,
and if you, when providing information,
when forming impressions,
or when changing impressions,
which occur between people,
focus on this attention,
then, accordingly, you speak the same language.
And if you speak the same language,
then, accordingly, you immediately enter into a mutual understanding.
After all, what is our verbal interaction?
It doesn't matter if we speak Russian, English, Chinese, Japanese.
Our verbal interaction is that we want to be heard.
We want to be spoken to not just in one language,
but in our metaprograms.
So that from all the information that is dropped on us,
it is what I am used to distinguish.
I can distinguish exactly those points,
exactly then and exactly there,
how I am used to do it.
And, accordingly, when I see the same accents,
I feel the soul of my relatives.
And since it is the soul of my relatives,
it means that my attitude towards this person changes completely.
This is what concerns the focus of comparison.
The next element of the metaprogram is motivation.
As for motivation,
it is always the reason for a person's behavior.
What do I want to do?
And why do I want to do it?
When we talk about motivation,
two aspects are usually highlighted.
The first is the direction of motivation.
We list the advantages of a particular proposal
and say that if we sign this contract,
we will get a particular result.
And here the direction is important.
What is important for a person?
The result we are approaching,
or the negative result we are moving away from.
What will I get from this proposal?
Further development of my business
and the seizure of the market segment,
or I move away from my company,
from my competitors.
Different people are oriented to different aspects of life.
Someone is looking forward to what is waiting for him.
And of course, we always strive to see the positive ahead.
Our motivation is directed forward,
to what is waiting for me,
to the positive.
A normal person will not strive for the negative,
he is not a suicide.
The other person, on the contrary,
pays attention to all the negative things,
which may be the main task for him.
Not striving for the possible positive.
I can seize more market shares,
I can lose the one I have.
In this case, this person strives to avoid negative trends.
He is not oriented forward, not to the positive,
but to what I already have.
And this is what I should be driven by.
Moreover, I know a lot of unsuccessful examples.
I know how a company ceased to exist,
how it merged with someone,
how this company was sold.
I know a lot of unpleasant cases,
which I don't want.
And that's why it's important for me
not to avoid the next turtle,
but to avoid the negative,
which may be, which I have already avoided.
And that's why you came to me with an agreement.
I want to know now
how much more I will get rid of the negative,
which I have managed to get rid of.
This is the direction of motivation.
Again, when we talk to a person,
we should listen to what interests him.
What to go to or what to go from.
No matter how funny it is,
what does he use more often?
What is the preposition?
I want to try to build my speech
and my proposal in the dominant prepositions
for this person.
This is the direction of motivation.
But on the other hand,
there is another aspect of motivation,
which is activity.
There are active people,
they are interested in what I should do
for their fulfillment.
What should others do?
What should my activity be?
And there are other people,
who are interested in my proposal.
Okay, I have already reached certain limits,
I have already reached a certain position on the market.
Will it shake my position?
Will it make me do something again?
The difference between active and passive.
Someone is an activist, someone is a stabilizer.
Give the activist a direction.
Tell him what to do.
And accordingly, it will be his motivation
to do what no one has done before.
And the stabilizer, on the contrary.
I already have this stability.
How can I strengthen this stability even more?
It doesn't matter.
And it's not about what is good or bad,
to be active or passive.
People are divided by their ways of motivation in information.
And if you want to get their understanding,
you don't need to give an assessment to the person,
how he does something.
It's important for you to understand
whether he likes to do or stabilize.
And talk to him in his language.
These are the aspects that are important to understand about motivation.
But in order to understand this,
you just need to listen to what the person says,
what he focuses his attention on,
and what he focuses his attention on.